---
id: "viennese-cafe-culture"
title: "Viennese café culture"
date: "2020-08-10"
author: Seb Lawson
featuredImage: viennesecafeculture.jpg
tags: []
---
So much of our modern anxiety stems from the masochistic barrage we digest online. This leaves us with a false sense that everything and everyone around us is moving rapidly in a chosen, impressively decisive direction. While this is clearly not the reality, it can be hard to mentally side-step the fear that all around us change is happening faster than we would ideally want. It helps to find little totems to remind us that there are different paces to the world. The most obvious is the work of nature that moves slowly but resiliently, but what we could also add to the list is Viennese café culture. Hear me out.

First of all the waiters – they are not culturally bound by inauthentic Californian niceties; they are not forced to smile or acknowledge that it is a lovely day even if their new-born has been screaming all night. They are archetypally surly, a bit morose perhaps. In truth they can stray very far from the disciplined charm of waitering around most the world. Yet they are unashamedly, unmistakably themselves; they feel their work does not, or should not require them to change. It is because of this that they generate a strange comfort with their nonchalant stroll, it feels they are welcoming you into their home rather than cajoling you into a hearty tip. Coupled with their own idiosyncrasies each café is a soothing show for the perceptive traveller.

The second point to be made is the speed of the experience. Service is no slower than usual and yet the ease with which the waiters waltz around their establishment seems to ease the heavy burden of time. They will stop to share a joke with a familiar at the bar, or exchange anecdotes whilst balancing strudel and cream-topped coffee in each hand, they may even sit at an empty table to read the paper for 5 minutes. You would find it difficult to say they ever look flustered. It all starts to feel rather serene. City centre coffee houses can almost feel too efficient, too anxious and overly sanitised, no matter how avant-garde the coffee beans. Yet in these dark cavernous cafes, with gritty posters on the walls, anaemic furniture and a lingering scent of tobacco you get a more soulful, sensory experience. It is perhaps an unintentional glimpse into the past. You can actually picture Freud or Wittgenstein sitting across the room rather than just hear stories about how they used to come here. Sitting in a capacious corner you feel part of a commune rather than a beneficiary of commerce. You can feel the past being intimately drawn into the present. It might be all we need to ease the pressure we place so harshly upon ourselves.
